This is the 22nd of February. Looks like perhaps it
might rain outside. In the former student
building, interviewing Ed Cooper, the second of
what may be a number of interviews. Ed, try yours
now. OK. Here I am in the library at the alumni
office talking at a regular tone.
We chatted with earlier about your student
experiences Let's begin today when you came to
College Station after serving in the extension
service actually My first job, I was assistant
county agricultural agent in Travis County,
Austin, Texas. And that was just for a brief tour of
duty to get a feel of what county agricultural
agent work was all about. I had just returned from
Germany as a lieutenant in the 2nd Armored
Division, a tank platoon leader. And they put me in
training in Austin. When Mr. Callender retired, I
spent seven years as extension specialist in
wildlife conservation and traveled all over the
state. Some of my best memories of people in Texas
occurred during those years. Then I left
extension to get wealthy. That did not work. And I
got a call from Clark C. Monroe, who was personnel
director. That was the title. I wondered if I would
interview as a prospect for President Rutter's
assistant. Darcy McCrory had become director of
development. That wasn't the title at the time,
but that's what it was, fundraising. And I went in
to Darcy. I'm getting ahead of myself. I went, I
agreed to an interview. I was scared. I was afraid
of Mr. Rutter as a lot of people were because here's
an Army general and highly decorated veteran and I
really didn't know what to expect and cold steel
looking eyes and penetrating gaze and he looked me
over and he says, Cooper, I understand that you
sell limestone. I said, yes, sir, that's our
business. And he said, would you make a good deal
for me? I said, sure. Where do you want it? He said,
well, it's between London and Hex, Texas. I said,
you're talking about the hill country. I said, the
whole thing is limestone. I don't think you really
need it. And he just died laughing. And that's the
way it started, and it got better from there. And I
think with my military background and having come
from the little town of San Marcos, things like
that influenced him. I had been in the band and
things like that, and I'd done some things that he
paralleled with in some ways. What seemed to be his
greatest concerns in that first conversation?
We didn't... We didn't get into any substantial
subject matter discussions at all, or as they
would say these days, issues. There was no hint of
that. I think his whole strategy, as he told me
later, was to scope me out as an individual
checking out my personal likes, dislikes,
experiences, that kind of thing. I remember years
later I was talking to him while I was on his staff
about a faculty member that was really, can I use
real language, really making an ass out of himself
about two or three little things. And he just kept
on. And I said,
Why does the world have people like that? He said,
well, when you hire someone, he said, no one is
perfect. He said, find out very quickly what they
do well at, keep them focused completely on that,
and don't let them get out in the left or right field
where they can't handle it. You can't expect them
to do it if they're not inclined to do it, He said, so
the secret to success and having people work for
you is have them do what they're good at, and I don't
really care what he says. He's a good professor.
Now, you were not acquainted with him other than
very casually before. That's right. I'd seen him
at a distance.
We hit it off, and a very short time later, I got back
to Jacksonville, where I was living, In other
words, I felt good about the interview. I felt he
made me feel comfortable. He knew how to do that.
And I think, to me, that's a trait of a great man,
that they can find out what level you're at and they
can adjust and bring themselves into that level so
that good conversation takes place. But he wasn't
scoping me out on anything like coeducation or
integration or anything like that that came up
while I was working for him. But I went to Dorsey
McCrory as he left his office, and I said, Dorsey,
tell me how to be a good assistant to the president.
And he looked at me and smiled. He said, well,
you'll find out. and said, I'll see you later, and
he walked out. That was my total training for this
job. Now, the selection, your being selected for
this job occurred when? 1963. 63. 63. I was in that
job four years. So we were right at the decision
time for coeducation, voluntary core, and all
that. That's right. Those things were already
rumbling. And the things that, the big issues that
came up in high school while I was in his office,
to me the big issues were changing the name from
Agricultural Mechanical College to Texas A&M
University. The admission of black students. Of
course, we'd had Hispanic for all time. That was
never even an issue. The admission of female
students and making the core non-compulsory.
As much as, as close as he and I were,
There are some things that I never did really
understand about him, and the main one was how he
really felt about the admission of women. I
thought I could read him, and he would say
something one time that would make me think, well,
he's for this, and then he'd say something else. He
would kind of sway with whoever he was talking
with, about that subject. And of the four that I
just mentioned, girls, blacks, name change,
non-compulsory,
of those four things, the women issue, the woman
issue, was so far ahead of the others that they were
just left in the dust. I recall reports, I've
talked with Mrs. Rutter about this too, the papers
reported that when There was a threat of girls
coming to A&M. People were sending in diplomas by
the suitcase full and senior rings and nasty
letters. If they came in, Haskell, I didn't see
them. I remember one torn-up diploma, and I
remember one senior ring that was sent by. And I
found out later that the man had gotten so big he
couldn't wear the ring anymore anyway. But...
there were three or four redneck Aggies, I call
them, one in Beaumont, one in Dallas. And I'll not
call names, but they stirred up a considerable
amount of controversy. And it's like the crowd
that said, give us Barnabas. That was something
that a lot of people wanted to say but didn't have
the courage to say. My mother, bless her heart,
felt very strongly against coeducation. And I
often wish that I could take her back across the
campus and show her what has happened. She's gone.
She lived to be 94, but she never was sold on that
subject because she remembered A&M in the good old
days when the boys wore gray and the girls weren't
around to confuse us. One day in a conversation not
recorded, You shared with me an idea that you,
where you thought there was a person that Mr.
Rutter had known a long time in politics that may
have encouraged him. As far as the change goes?
Yes. Yes. That little story is, and he told me that
when he went to Washington, while after Mr.
Johnson became president, which was what, 63?
Mm-hmm. If he found out that Earl Rudder had been in
town and spent some time without spending the
night at the White House, he would get a nasty
telephone call because they, well of course he was
his West Texas campaign manager. It hurt his
feelings when Mr. Rutter would go to town and not go
by. And so one time he went and I believe it was the
same trip where he had this conversation that is
urgently important. I believe it was the same
trip. An emergency came up that required Mr.
Johnson's attention on end of the night. And
President Rutter said, well, we're not going to
get to have a drink and talk politics tonight. And I
read in the paper where Fiddler on the Roof is
showing at a theater near the White House. And so he
got permission and left, took in the movie. And
about 5 the next morning, the phone rang. And he
said, goddammit, Rutter. He said, you're a guest
of the President of the United States, and you
won't even stay here and drink whiskey with him
after work's over. And I think it was that trip or
very close to it. And Mr. Rudder did not always tell
me. He didn't have time or inclination. He didn't
always tell me all of the personalities, all of the
stuff that was going on. It's just impossible. So I
was not privy to a lot of things that... because of
the nature of the job that I had, a lot of big things
that were going on. But on this particular thing,
he said that he talked with President Johnson. He
said, Lyndon, they're talking about
integration,
changing the name, making the core
non-compulsory, and of all things, letting girls
in our school. And the board would have to make that
decision. He said, but I'd be right in the middle of
it, of course. He said, what do you think? And he
said, two of the things you're talking about, I
don't think anyone in Washington cares about. But
there are two things you're talking about that we
do care about. one is equal opportunity for girls,
one is equal opportunity for black people. He
said, if you move into those right now, you can do it
in your style and your way. If you don't, we'll do it
for you. And I don't think you'll like the way we're
going to do it. So with that message,
He was able to come back and meet with some key
alumni officials, former students, through the
board and said, listen, fellas, here's the way it
is. Now, if you want to fight that thing, tooth and
toenail, we can do it, but we're going to be made
laughing stock. The big man has said that the feds
are going to do it for us. If we don't do it our way,
could you get the word out to where the hell is being
raised and let them know where we really stand. And
suddenly things got quiet. And I remember, if I'm
not mistaken, the Winter Council meeting is the
one where a resolution had been drafted to support
the board in these moves. And I can't remember
whether it was all in the same document or not. I'm
not sure about that. My memory's not that good. But
the main one, of course, was girls. And if I'm not
mistaken, John Lindsay was president that year.
And if my memory is correct, the board of
directors, as we then call the regents, and the
association board met the same day. And there was a
quick approval, and they went down the hallway
quickly. Yeah, they were in the same building.
Right. They were in the, the council meeting was in
the, what we call the assembly room or something
else now. But I remember I was in the room and the
resolution was raised and John Lindsay was about
the color of your shirt, afraid of a bomb, you know,
blowing up there at the meeting. And I think there
had been discussions about who would make the
motion. and who would second it and it happened
like a shot in the dark and the gavel was slammed and
he said motion approved and uh and he he got off that
that hot stool probably the hottest one he's ever
been on and and from then on really uh it was a
foregone conclusion and then you'll remember of
course all of the how the legislature got involved
in it And that was a very unpleasant kind of a thing.
And there was all sorts of attempts to sway people
one way or the other. And they had an open forum on
the subject on the floor of the house. And people
made impassioned speeches. And it was not well
handled. And I don't remember all the specifics of
who did what. I do remember that... There was even a
little hanky-panky involved, trade-offs, and
I'll not mention who that involved. Now, our local
legislators were strongly in favor of the
changes. Yes, yes. And that would have been
Senator Bill Moore. Right. Was it David Haynes?
No, no. Presnell? No, before him. Before Haynes
even? Yeah, a quiet guy. Oh, was it Brownrig Dewey?
Brownrig Dewey. Yeah, later came in and was
Justice of the Peaks. That's right. Yeah,
Brownrig Dewey, that's right. He preceded
Haynes, and then Haynes was...
personal came in after Hank on the board of
directors then as far as you can recall who were the
key first broad question who were the most
powerful most potent members of the board of
directors at that time Sterling Evans and of
course things that you and I cherished here, he was
largely responsible for above and beyond that.
But he honestly felt deep in his heart about
coeducation. All right, let me offer his answer. I
asked him, when did he favor coeducation? And he
said, what do you mean? I said, when did you start
believing that girls ought to be at A&M? And he
grinned and said, when I got here as a 17-year-old
boy. And there weren't any. He said, I have always
been for coeducation. Sterling Evans, to me, I
saw great people on that board of directors back
there.
Dr. Boyle. from Dow Chemical in his precise German
ways would bring the first handheld computers
I've ever seen. And they'd be up talking about
construction costs and financing and interest
rates and all. And he'd say, you're off a little bit
on that, aren't you? And he was checking them out as
they spoke. And the man that was president of
Tennessee Gas Not Cain. No. Not Orford Cain. Oh,
it'll come to me before we're through. But there
were some sure enough good people on there. Of
course, Clyde Wills had been on there forever. All
right. Al Davies and Dick Goodson come along
somewhere about that time. That's right. Sears
and Southwestern Bell. Right. And the man with
Hart Hanks, the... Man from Amarillo, Amarillo
Globe News. Those names now are getting fuzzy with
me. We can identify those. But
L.F. Peterson was in there. As far as my memory, the
man from
Boydle and Evans and the guy with Tennessee Gas,
good gracious. They were really super players,
and they didn't have axes to grind. They wanted to
do what was right. And
when they would come to town, and there'd be these
little sessions before the board meeting, the
directors would say to President Rutter, What do
you want us to do for you at this meeting? And since
then, it has not always been that way. Now you're
inferring that they gave evidence that they
thought their task was to help the institution.
not to micromanage it. That's correct. As far as
you're aware, with those big issues, those four
big issues, who was the most outspoken opponent on
the board, if there was one?
The guy from, this is not in response to that
question, but Sam Wittenberg was the man from
Amarillo. He was, I mean, he was top notch. He
didn't attend all the meetings, but he was here.
But I was not aware of an individual on the board
that was vociferous about those issues. If there
were, I don't know who it would be. I don't remember
any newspaper discussion of there being a divided
vote. It seemed to me as an outsider that whatever
differences of opinion there were, they resolved
them. and gave publicly the appearance of
unanimity. That's correct. And of course things
go on in chambers that you and I would never have
access to and no one would ever talk about. So it may
have been a rougher road to hoe than I know about,
but I think I would have heard something about it.
And we didn't have open meetings law then. No, we
did not. In my interview with Vice President Wayne
Hull, then the Chief Academic Officer, he
indicated that he is the one who thought up the name
as it now is with the A&M with no periods, no
abbreviations. He said that it was his
recollection that Mr. Rutter was very much
bothered by the proposed name of Texas State
University and that he wanted the A&M and that he,
Hall, came up with that and Mr. Rutter liked that. I
don't remember that particular thing. But I do
remember his resentment of Texas State
University. He did not like that. He was enough. I
think his idea at Haskell was that we're taking
away some things from some people that really are
near and dear to us. Let's don't take it all. Let's
leave the symbolic part. name of the place at least
and so uh but this is what he was good at and of course
that's what lyndon johnson was good at he would uh
he knew how to compromise now uh once in a
conversation with mr rutter early in 19 calendar
1970 i said to him mr rudder only you could have done
that although made those changes he grinned and he
said why do you say that and i then kind of made a list
Verbally, I said, sir, they couldn't say you
weren't a Texan, you weren't an Aggie, you hadn't
been in the Corps, you hadn't served your country,
that you're one of those fuddy-duddy PhDs from
somewhere way off in the Northeast. And he smiled
and he said, oh, I never thought of any of that. His
smile gave me the impression that he had a great
deal. What I'm leading to is a question. Did his
background...
of being a Texan and an Aggie, do you recall that
that was very positive in his being able to make
those changes occur? Yes.
Well, of course,
he's a hill country boy.
He worked hard all his life. He was from humble
beginnings. He got into the land commissioner's
job by being close to. He had attributes across the
board that were positive in his background and his
experience. And, of course, his war record just
enhanced all of that. But I can't think of anything
that would have been negative. If you say to
someone from Texas,
wherever you are, geographically
you say well he's he's an old hill country boy they
know what you're talking about and there's some
kind of a positive connotation with that maybe
it's because it's the heart of Texas or it is a part
of Texas that everybody loves but there's kind of a
feeling that if he grew up there some of the
goodness of it had to rub off on him All right, let's
mention some of the other relationships. What was
his relationship with our congressman at that
time?
The congressman?
I asked my Sunday school class the other day. We
were talking about Timothy and his role going to
Philippi at Paul's request to satisfy some
problems at the church. The man had humility and
the deepest faith that anyone could imagine, and
that's why Paul sent him out. While he was in jail,
he was most of the time. But I asked this class the
other day, I said, now name me a person right now,
either in Austin or Washington, that you would
describe as one of great humility and anxiety to
serve with no selfish motive who is that person and
I said I knew such a person and I would have called
his name if you would have asked me that it was
Olenny Teague I said he would comb his hair ten
years after the war and pieces of shrapnel would
come out with a comb and he would come up to me and
after not having seen me for a while and kind of
waddled up and put his hand out way before he got to
me and his words were always the same, Edwin Cooper
or Ed Cooper, what can I do for you today and how is
Peggy and all those kids.
I see Congressman Teague and Mr. Rutter as being in
many ways peas out of the same pod they had the same
strong conviction about America and about Texas
and about doing things right and I think they
honestly both had the spirit of what I think is one
of the best logos of any civic club in the world
namely Rotary when an issue comes up and a decision
has to be made What is it that will do the most good
for the most people for the longest period of time?
Now, how can you improve on that? And I really
believe that both those men felt that way. They
loved to tease each other. Tiger
loved to tell a story about the cow that wouldn't
give enough milk, and Mr. Rudder would water it
down, and he'd counterattack with his high-level
jaw about it. Sheep barn shoveling manure and
stuff like that. But they truly and honestly
admired and respected each other. They were
playing off the same page. I remember one day Mr.
Rudder came up to me and said, Listen, Tiger's
coming in. He's going to be over in the lobby of the
MSC at 1.30. Then he expects me to be there.
Something's come up. I cannot be there. And he
handed me a roll of $50 bills, I think. I believe
there were eight of them. And he said, when you
shake hands with Tiger, have that palm in your hand
and don't tell him who it came from. He said, the man
that gave it to me doesn't want him to know. And I
shook hands with Tiger. And of course, he felt the
money. He looked down. He didn't say a word. He just
kept on talking. But there was that.
well-understood interchange of things
political that happened between two people like
that. That's what makes the world go round. But
they were very much alike in their temperament.
Olin E. Teague never came to College Station
without telling President Rutter when he'd be
here and when they could get together. And they
would set up late hours. They'd have a drink or two
and talk about what it was in Washington, what it
was in College Station that were issues of the day.
And then the then comparatively young new
governor and his wife, I understand, had been
classmates of Mrs. Rutter at the University of
Texas.
What was the relationship of President Rutter
with Governor Conley?
Their roots went back a
good ways. And it was first name basis. I remember
the governor was here after having been shot in the
parade at Dallas, not too long afterwards. And we
had, we met, we, Mr. Rudder and Mr. the vice
presidents and all, they formed an honor guard
with the RVs with the swords at that west entry down
to where the board quarters are now of the MSC and
the boys gave, present arms and raised their
swords and here we were at one end waiting for them
to come through and Connolly flinched as if he was
scared when the swords were drawn, and he was
teasing. He just did like that, you know. And when
he got to Mr. Rutter, he held his arm out, and he
said, Earl, don't twist my arm. It still hurts. And
then they went into one of those rooms that was
reserved for regents, I think. That's before they
had their own quarters. And they talked for hours
in there. And he was here to, it might have been a
commencement speech, but...
When you consider the political arena of